in the last few years it has become easy
perhaps all too easy for people to
identify themselves as quote unquote
anti-capitalist without explaining what
it is they're in favor of or really what
their critique or rejection of
capitalism is about now obviously some
of these people are to be frank crypto
communists they're communists who do not
have the courage of their convictions to
really identify with communism and they
also may be aware that they are simply
ignorant of and don't want to make
excuses for the disasters of communism
in the recent past on this same youtube
channel you can watch some videos that
deal with mass starvation under
communism it's an incongruous and
interesting fact that many people
criticize and blame capitalism for
starvation in the world with the very
simple premise that food costs money
therefore you can blame capitalism and
they do not want to face up to deal with
or discuss the real history of mass
starvation under communism for example
in the Soviet Union and in communist
China under Mao Zedong now I myself
lived in and researched agriculture in a
former communist country called Laos the
lao people's democratic republic and i
was there when their transition from a
communist system of food production and
food distribution to a capitalist system
was quite resented some ways still
ongoing and when they were still dealing
with the sudden contrast between those
two systems I studied that and in my own
small way I was a part of that
transition I'll describe how that was in
just a moment Laos is a somewhat
strangely shaped country during their
high Communist period their period of
not having a market economy in rice rice
was grown by farmers it was taxed by the
government but it was also redistributed
by the government so under communism
under high communism because it's still
a communist country but now it's a
communist country with a free market
economy this meant that rice was taken
away from the rich and given to the poor
it was distributed to the people who
need it most now many people think that
sounds wonderful
you simply state it in so many words in
a simple sentence and all kinds of
people will flock to the banner of
communism and support communism
especially if they're unaware of the
real history of mass starvation and
other disasters under communist
governments now Laos interestingly was
not one of those disasters Laos did not
have the type of mass starvation that
did happen in China that's a
tremendously important chapter of human
history that frankly every age educated
person should devote a little bit of
time to studying and understanding the
consequences and ramifications are so
enormous Laos also did not have the type
of disaster that happened just to the
south in Cambodia they didn't have the
type of mass murder or mass persecution
etc in many ways the tiny lao people's
democratic republic is one of the most
positive or one of the most flattering
examples of communism that you could
look at another one I mean East Germany
believe me I think this to FLAC these
Germans plenty of people written
autobiographies but a horrible life was
under communism in East Germany but
nevertheless you have to say compared to
the real disasters of communism places
like East Germany and Laos were really
the success stories now here's what
happen when they transition to
capitalism suddenly rice was no longer
being sent from the centers where it was
aggregated where there was the most
production and we're natural there'd be
the most wealth to the areas where
people were poor starving etc rice was
no longer being redistributed as
according to need now need ultimately
means a bureaucrat has a piece of paper
with a list saying send so many
kilograms to this village so many
kilograms to that village that's another
problematic issue but in principle under
communism rice was being reallocated to
the people who needed it the same way
that the military tries to organize
sending food giving rations etcetera to
the people in need and indeed communism
brings about one way or another the
militarization of a whole society under
capitalism instead rice began flowing in
the exact opposite direction race was no
longer going to the people who needed it
it was going to the people who had the
greatest ability to pay
now in terms of the geography of Laos
that meant that in the middle of the
country pretty much all of the rice
would aggregate in the capital city rice
was going to wear was least needed this
does not say the rich are getting richer
but naturally people would sell their
rice to the central market so to speak
and from there a great deal of it would
be exported to Thailand again people
didn't need it people were not poorer
people are not starving where people
were less poor people have more money
more ability to pay now the double-edged
sword of capitalism is that this
benefited exactly the same people who
had harmed so people who were rice
farmers in remote rural areas were
suddenly making more money from the rice
they're being paid a better wage they
were themselves farming rice producing
rice and selling it at a better price
when it came time to sell in terms of
the logic of the market the rice would
then go wherever it went some people go
to Thailand some who go to Vietnam some
of it will go to the big cities but then
when there was famine when there was
seasonal starvation when there was a
lack of food locally that in some areas
would happen like clockwork in between
harvest seasons then there would be no
rice to redistribute from the rich to
the poor now I myself was part of
capitalism's method of compensating for
this and I should say there are two
methods so I'm going to do number one
and then number two method number one
was simply charity a charity is itself
part of the capitalist system it's not a
contradiction within the capitalist
system it's not an offence the guidepost
system I myself was part of an agency
that's handed out sacks of rice that
were donated to the poorest of the poor
in Laos to be blue would have been
starving against seasonal starvation
that had written on every sack gift of
Finland stamped onto the plastic with
some kind of logo vaguely resembling
United Nations logo you had a map of
Finland sorry a flag of Finland on there
somewhere and I can remember having some
really surreal conversations with local
villagers people receiving this these
donations as aid and they asked me we're
speaking while both way
but I was speaking very simple out
course I didn't become completely fluent
in the language they said to me things
like tell me Finland it's a tropical
country somewhere in the South Pacific
isn't it Finland it's it's a small
island near Australia perhaps yeah
that's the way allow people ask a
question they they make a statement and
then ask you isn't it at the end hmm had
some really interesting conversations
about where finland was and why these
people in finland were donating rice to
poor people and laos interesting
conversation had in that context um I
can remember they asked me also in terms
of the climate in Finland boy they must
farm a lot of rice and I told them no
actually not at all Finland is such a
cold country that they don't farm any
rice whatsoever this led to more
interesting questions but look number
two under capitalism and this is going
to sound cynical but it is all too real
if you're open-minded enough to read
real history primary source documents
etc people fundamentally have the
freedom to get up and move to run away
from famine even to go to another area
and beg now if you're talking to left
wingers you're talking to people who are
diehard communist they'll then throw
this back here is oh you talk about
freedom this is just the freedom to go
from one place to another and starve to
death the freedom to go begging from
plus another we'll take a look at the
video i made about masturbation under
communism in china a real disaster
really killed millions and millions of
people and yes there is a difference
between a government that will kill you
literally kill you for daring to
complain that your village is starving
to death and a government that allows
you to get on a train get on a truck or
even walk barefoot from your province to
the next province because people are
starving yes in extreme situation that's
a huge fundamental difference ultimately
when you're talking about famine when
you talk about food shortages even we
talk about unemployment
but in extreme situations the freedom to
move from one place to another the
freedom to ask for help whether that's
demanding help from the government or
just demanding help from whoever has the
rice to give it to you is crucially
important and one of the reasons why
masturbation was so disastrous and so
dramatic in both communist China and
Russia was that people were deprived of
those freedoms it's no joke you know if
you really are willing to read those
accounts of mass starvation whether
under Soviet Union or under China for a
lot of people they break down crying I
haven't had anyone admit that they were
weeping openly but in talking to
professor's about it here you know when
I was talking about the different
sources on this period of history the
different published text a lot of the
mitted to me that after you know that
reading those books some of them they
couldn't finish the book something say
yeah I could read that stuff for an hour
or two but then I have to put it down
and work on something else it's heavy I
mean reading about the reality of food
production starvation etc under
communism it'll it'll mark you I
depending on what kind of character i
can say it'll scar you for life and look
I'm still I mean studying the history of
communism is still a big part of my life
yeah I wish these were the only books on
my desk I'm more here only this side of
the camera um and I can read that
history with a certain degree of
sympathy for the idealism of the people
involved but my point here is whether or
not the critique of capitalism comes up
in the context of a vegan interest in
making the feeding of the poor more
efficient by eliminating meet
agriculture or in terms of reforming
capitalism there were many different
headings under which this is a
legitimate and interesting set of
questions we can't allow ourselves to
fall into the lazy way of thinking of
simply saying well I'm anti-capitalist
therefore I'm morally pure without
identifying what it is you're in favor
of in many ways the comparison between
capitalism and communism is asymmetrical
because communism is a specific system
of social organization
and really capitalism is an incredibly
broad and diverse category for example
capitalism is not incompatible with
monarchy really in history of the world
in many cases you had capitalism with a
monarchy ruling over it capitalism even
within the world today you can look at
ten different capitalist countries that
are very fundamentally profoundly
different including in the question of
how they organize food agriculture but
they still are capitalists really there
are just a couple of checkmarks that
define what a capitalist system is
including obviously the type of land
ownership there's a checklist that's not
that long etc whereas with communism you
are really talking about one specific
system and it is a system that has a
history that many people today are
tempted to ignore but that we dare not
ignore that gives us a set of lessons
that we must learn from and those
lessons include the most dramatic
episodes of mass starvation in the
history of the world